Ethics page (#1375)
elixir-europe/rdmkit: pages/your_tasks/ethics.md

​
* There are also general research ethics considerations that are relevant in the context of research data, including:
    * What are the reasons justifying the exclusion/inclusion of research data in a particular context?
    * Is the data source accurate and trustworthy?
    * How can bias in practices of research data management be identified and minimised/avoided?
    * Assessment of models and algorithms used with respect to possible bias
    * Can the research data be misinterpreted?
    * Prevention of withholding of research data
    * Prevention of manipulation and fraud of research data
    * Assessment of who is excluded or included to data access and why
    * How can harm to other beings and the environment be identified and mitigated in a timely manner?
​
### Solutions
* Assess potential ethical implication through an ethics review
    * Your local ethics committee can help you to review the ethical implications of the project or might guide you to more relevant bodies and resources
* In order to address challenges when working with human data (see also the [RDMkit page on human data](human_data))

>     * Used standardised consent forms (see e.g. [GA4GH consent toolkit]({% raw %}https://www.ga4gh.org/resource-library/#{%22document%22:{%22category%22:%22Toolkit%20Component%22,%22related_products%22:%22Consent%20Toolkit%22}}{% endraw %}), [BBMRI](https://zenodo.org/record/3928446)) that can be represented in a machine actionable way ([DUO](https://www.ga4gh.org/product/data-use-ontology-duo/))

Reviewer: This point needs to revised, including the link to consent toolkit - it's not displayed properly in preview. Also, there needs to be some more/clear information in order to mention DUO and the GA4GH link for it.

Author: ```suggestion
    * Used standardised consent forms (see e.g. 
{% tool "ga4gh-regulatory-and-ethics-toolkit" %}) with clauses that can be represented in a machine actionable way using the {% tool "data-use-ontology" %} and {% tool "informed-consent-ontology" %})
```

    * [WMA Declaration of Helsinki – Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects](https://www.wma.net/policies-post/wma-declaration-of-helsinki-ethical-principles-for-medical-research-involving-human-subjects/)  
    * For animal research: the [Three Rs principle](https://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_committees/opinions_layman/en/non-human-primates/glossary/tuv/three-rs-principle.htm)  
    * For data produced with Machine Learning (ML) techniques: the [recommendations from UNESCO](https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/recommendation-ethics), and the [DOME guidelines](https://dome-ml.org/), a product of the [ELIXIR ML focus group](https://elixir-europe.org/focus-groups/machine-learning)  
* Resources and Policies from research infrastructures
    * {% tool "bbmri-eric-s-elsi-knowledge-base" %} and the BBMRI [Helpdesk and Services](https://www.bbmri-eric.eu/elsi/helpdesk/)
    * ELIXIR ELSI Policy [ELIXIR Ethics Policy](https://zenodo.org/record/557027#.ZGtrzpFBxD8)  
* Check existing EU policies, directives and regulations

>     * The [General Data Protection Regulation](https://gdprinfo.eu/)

Reviewer: might be worth pointing to https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/gdpr_compliance here or earlier in text. Just a suggestion

    * The European [Clinical Trials Regulation](https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/research-development/clinical-trials/clinical-trials-regulation)

### Further materials
* Basic ethical principles are compliant with relevant international regulations:
    * [Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 10 December 1948](https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights)
    * [Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights](https://rm.coe.int/CoERMPublicCommonSearchServices/DisplayDCTMContent?documentId=090000168007ff47)
    * [Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with Regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data 1981 (convention 108)](https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list?module=treaty-detail&treatynum=108)
    * [Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union 2010/C 83/0215](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2010:083:0389:0403:en:PDF)

>     * [Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of Personal Data and on the free movement of such data](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A31995L0046)https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A31995L0046

Author: ```suggestion
    * [Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of Personal Data and on the free movement of such data](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A31995L0046)
```

---
title: Ethical aspects
contributors: [Karel Berka , Erin Calhoun, Paulette Lieby, Anamika Chatterjee, Korbinian Bösl]
description: Working on aspects in the management of research data that can raise ethical issues
page_id: ethics
related_pages:
  tool_assembly: [covid-19, transmed, tsd, csc]
training:
- name: 'Ethics/ELSI considerations - From FAIR to fair data sharing - recorded webinar'
  registry: TeSS

>   url: https://tess.elixir-europe.org/materials/ethics-elsi-considerations-from-fair-to-fair-data-sharing

Author: changed in 007a321a4416ca993637150cf8da67240f331b6d

There are additional considerations connected to health research. Under the viewpoint of RDM you should especially consider:
    * Free and informed consent, the possibility of its withdrawal, its documentation, withdrawal (connected with data deletion) and its representation in a machine-actionable way (see also [What information must be given individuals whose data is collected](https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-topic/data-protection/reform/rules-business-and-organisations/principles-gdpr/what-information-must-be-given-individuals-whose-data-collected_en), the [EU clinical trials regulation](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32014R0536) and respective national health research legislations)
    * Balancing access to research data and privacy of research participants (see [How much data can be collected](https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-topic/data-protection/reform/rules-business-and-organisations/principles-gdpr/how-much-data-can-be-collected_en), the [EU clinical trials regulation](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32014R0536) and respective national health research legislations)

>     * Unintentional discrimination of research participants

Author: @Nazeeefa does this work as an example?

>     * Unintentional discrimination of research participants

Reviewer: 'such as migrants' part is not necessary.

    * Findings about participants that are outside of the original research question(s): see [Purpose of data processing](https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-topic/data-protection/reform/rules-business-and-organisations/principles-gdpr/purpose-data-processing_en) and [Incidental findings Archives - BBMRI-ERIC](https://www.bbmri-eric.eu/elsi-topic/incidental-findings/)
​
* Other ethical questions are arising from the impact of research outcomes, including data on the interest of communities or individuals

>     * Fair management of intellectual property rights - also see e.g. ABS

Author: ```suggestion
    * Fair management of intellectual property rights - also see e.g. Access and Benefit-sharing (ABS)
```

    * Publication of research data that might impact the reputation of communities or individuals
    * Publication of research data that might impact economical interests of  communities or individuals

>     * Publication of research data that might impact security of society, communities or individuals

Author: I think there a different considerations for both, so I would suggest to keep them seperate

​

> * General research ethics considerations that are also reflecting on research data, including:

Author: ```suggestion
* There are also general research ethics considerations that are relevant in the context of research data, including:
```

    * Assessment of models and algorithms used with respect to possible bias
    * Can the research data be misinterpreted?
    * Prevention of withholding of research data
    * Prevention of manipulation and fraud of research data
    * Assessment of who is excluded or included to data access and why
    * How can harm to other beings and the environment be identified and mitigated in a timely manner?
​
### Solutions
* Assess potential ethical implication through an ethics review
    * Your local ethics committee can help you to review the ethical implications of the project or might guide you to more relevant bodies and resources
* In order to address challenges when working with human data (see also the [RDMkit page on human data](human_data))
    * Used standardised consent forms (see e.g. [GA4GH consent toolkit]({% raw %}https://www.ga4gh.org/resource-library/#{%22document%22:{%22category%22:%22Toolkit%20Component%22,%22related_products%22:%22Consent%20Toolkit%22}}{% endraw %}), [BBMRI](https://zenodo.org/record/3928446)) that can be represented in a machine actionable way ([DUO](https://www.ga4gh.org/product/data-use-ontology-duo/))

>     * Anticipate the possibility of consent/data withdrawal and implement administrative and technical processes before you start collecting/processing, be transparent about these in the consent form and also about the cases when withdrawal is no longer possible due to anonymization, aggregation, or other data processing.

Author: ```suggestion
    * Before you start collecting/processing data, be transparent about these in the consent form and also about the cases when withdrawal is no longer possible due to anonymization, aggregation, or other data processing.  Anticipate the possibility of consent/data withdrawal and implement administrative and technical processes.
```

    * Create processes for incidental findings before you start collecting data, include the way the participant wants you to deal with it in the consent form
* In order to manage the impact of data collection and sharing:
    * The management of intellectual property rights connected with the data, if any, should be planned early on ([RDMkit data management plan page](dmp)), be part of collaboration/consortium agreements, and make use of [standard licensing terms](licensing)
    * The Nagoya Protocol regulates access to genetic resources and conditions for transfer of genetic resources and traditional knowledge across counties. For implementations into national law please consult the [ABS Clearing House](https://absch.cbd.int/en/) (also see [RDMkit compliance monitoring & measurement](compliance))  
    * Laws & Regulations concerning biosecurity, data export control and national interests might be linked from the [RDMkit national resources pages](national_resources)
    * In order to ensure conformity with ethical research principles, the following should also be considered for data management:

>         * Follow general research ethics laws and guidelines (see below)

Reviewer: Is it possible to link sub-section where it says 'see below'?

Author: ```suggestion
        * Follow general research ethics laws and guidelines (see [below](ethics#how-can-i-identify-regulations-guidelines-and-laws-connected-to-ethics-in-my-research-context))
```

Author: @Nazeeefa added link

        * Automated sharing of research data after a specific period or milestones and deliverables in a project can be a good mechanism to enhance the openness of a project ([data management coordination](dm_coordination))
​

## How can I identify regulations, guidelines and laws connected to ethics in my research context?
​
### Considerations
* In all cases, your institution’s Data Protection Officer (DPO) is the person to refer to when considering ethical and legal aspects of data management.
* When looking for recommendations and regulations, it is best to start from the local, that is, starting what is applicable within your discipline, and nationally. Then (if applicable), EU policies, directives and regulations are to be explored, as well as global recommendations (for example, from the UNESCO).

> * The list of resources given below does not attempt to be exhaustive: it tries to highlight the most relevant ones.

Reviewer: Which list does this refer to? :) maybe you can rewrite this to make it clear, thanks

Author: ```suggestion
* The solutions given below do not attempt to be exhaustive and highlight only the most relevant ones.
```

    * For animal research: the [Three Rs principle](https://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_committees/opinions_layman/en/non-human-primates/glossary/tuv/three-rs-principle.htm)  
    * For data produced with Machine Learning (ML) techniques: the [recommendations from UNESCO](https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/recommendation-ethics), and the [DOME guidelines](https://dome-ml.org/), a product of the [ELIXIR ML focus group](https://elixir-europe.org/focus-groups/machine-learning)  
* Resources and Policies from research infrastructures
    * {% tool "bbmri-eric-s-elsi-knowledge-base" %} and the BBMRI [Helpdesk and Services](https://www.bbmri-eric.eu/elsi/helpdesk/)
    * ELIXIR ELSI Policy [ELIXIR Ethics Policy](https://zenodo.org/record/557027#.ZGtrzpFBxD8)  
* Check existing EU policies, directives and regulations
    * The [General Data Protection Regulation](https://gdprinfo.eu/)
    * The European [Clinical Trials Regulation](https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/research-development/clinical-trials/clinical-trials-regulation)

> ### Further materials

Reviewer: do you plan to add links to these?

Author: changed in 007a321a4416ca993637150cf8da67240f331b6d
